
2020-01-12: AMS AI Advanced course

Doc: https://sites.google.com/rams.colostate.edu/ams-ml4es/agenda-and-code?authuser=0

cmocean -> package for cmaps
keras -> package for NNs

Self organizing maps: Creates "new" organized data that match the pattern of the observations, instead of placing the actual observations into clusters

Pattern extraction (feature extraction)

often after normalization for comparability!!!

python: @ for matrix multiplication

PCA for SST -> shows WHERE the important variability is -> first: mid pacific

Autoencoders : NN structure to do basically non-linear PCA
Hyperparameter tuning to ensure no overfitting: checking if training error and validation error are similar.

Physical interpretation of NNs:

CNNs: convolution layer: learn features, pooling layer: reduce resolution to learn coarser-scale features (spatial feature detection), flattening 2D into 1D and feed it through a traditional NN --> final classification

Interpretations:
Variable inportance:

- Permutation test: randomly shuffle up predictor variables to break statistical linkage and check decline in prediction performance.
  (better than leaving out because you don't have to re-train the network)

NN: learning rates not too large... typically <10e-3

!!! novelty detection: detect stuff that diverges from a baseline set

Physics informed ML:

- Interpretation methods

- Random forests automatically e.g. conserve energy and ensure non-negative precipitation, etc.
-> physics obeyed by design (not necessarily made by NNs!) -> not creates an (empirical) continuius function

- constrain a loss funtion with physical knowledge (punishing for violating physics) [Beucler et al. 2019]

Session: Physical Interpretability in Machine Learning

---
PCA analysis: Outlier handling crucial!!
---

Elizabeth Barnes et al (2019) GRL - Neural Network Visualization - Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP) -> where to look to get a robust region -> find reliable indicators (Viewing forced climate patterns through an AI lens)
backward optimization to correct observations to improve the NN predictions !!! SM bias correction? !!!
Talk: Tuesday 10:30

--> physics guided machine learning --> visualization methods to see what ANN is learning!! modify network to confirm physics

ClimateNet -> labeled databases in DL to train networks -> exist for various communities and are the thing that make DL actually sucessful
